it happened around 8.7 million years ago
all of a sudden vast grasslands started
to open
clouds of volcanic gas and ash covered
the sky
flows of lava stream down the hills and
across the plains
within minutes black volcanic glass
started to rain from above
wiping out animals crushing plants it
didn't take long before the land
caved in opening giant pits filled with
red-hot magma
it was the greatest eruption of the
yellowstone super volcano
this giant which is actually one of the
largest active volcanic systems on the
planet
wasn't named super volcano for nothing
spreading deep underground and extending
for hundreds of miles
super volcanoes are complicated
structures
experts are still unsure what processes
can trigger these fire breathing
monsters
and lead to super eruptions when it
happens
more than 240 cubic miles of ash molten
rock
and hot gases get hurled up into the air
four super eruptions would be enough to
fill the grand canyon to the brim
volcanoes create mountains but super
volcanoes
wipe them off the face of the earth they
change
climates and ecosystems thankfully
these disastrous events don't happen
more often than
every 50 000 years or so
super volcanoes appear when huge volumes
of magma are trying to escape from deep
underground
and burst through the earth's surface
usually
all this magma gets stuck unable to
break through the planet's crust
large pools of pressurized bubbling
magma gather at a depth of several miles
the pressure keeps growing since more
and more magma is trying to get to the
surface
and then wham bam a super eruption
goes off all those
millions of years ago the first signs of
the disaster
appeared long before the catastrophe
broke out
for thousands of years the heat had been
welling up from within the planet's
insides
it had been melting rock beneath the
planet's crust
leaving behind huge chambers those were
filled with a pressurized mixture of
semi-solid rock
magma water vapor and different gases
including carbon dioxide all this
scorching underground soup
was expanding after more and more magma
arrived with time
the land over the volcanic system was
inching upward
slowly almost unnoticeably
a year before the super eruption
yellowstone
gave a warning but that long ago there
was no one who could interpret these
signals
plus those alarming processes were
mostly going on underground
for example decompression released gas
bubbles
while bursting such bubbles can often
power particular kinds of eruptions
months before the eruption small-scale
earthquakes became more frequent
and more intense the ground in many
spots all over the super volcano got
hotter than it used to be
surface lakes and groundwater also
became warmer
if people had been around at that time
they would have noticed unusual steam
fogging that area
not long before the eruption started the
growing pressure pushed the ground over
the magma chamber up
this created a dome-shaped uplift nero
cracks
started to open along the edges of this
dome
imagine opening a bottle with soda after
you've shaken it
something like that was happening near
the volcano
the pressure was released through the
fractures when gases were bursting out
from under the surface
right before the disaster the ground
around the yellowstone volcano
lifted geothermal pools and geysers
heated up to boiling temperatures
and got more acidic than usual the magma
started to rise toward the surface
at one point the rock roof of the magma
chamber couldn't resist anymore
and the eruption kicked off
small but constant tremors began to move
the ground days before the catastrophe
but the real shaking didn't start until
several minutes before the eruption
with a deafening roar a massive column
of lava and ash hurtled up into the air
to a height of over 16 miles within
several minutes
a pyroclastic flow rushed across the
area
at a phenomenal hurricane force speed
such a flow is a liquid mixture of
half-solid lava pieces
volcanic ash and hot expanding gases
it looked like an extremely hot toxic
snow avalanche
with the temperature of more than 1300
degrees fahrenheit
it was burning everything in its path
the volcano kept pumping ash for days on
end
the air in that area heated up to 570
degrees fahrenheit
for all living creatures ash fallout was
one of the most dangerous consequences
of the eruption
volcanic ash turns into glassy cement
within seconds after being inhaled
and getting in the lungs most animals
didn't have a chance to survive
even thick trees started to collapse
under the weight of this
dense substance it only took a couple of
days
until a 10 feet layer of ash covered the
territory of about 50 miles around the
center of the eruption
in the end tiny particles of volcanic
ash
coated almost all the western part of
north america
after the ash got into the stratosphere
the temperatures all over the world
started to drop the eruption was rich in
sulfur
which is an effective sun sunblocker
that's why it soon got so cold
that there was no summer in the whole
world for the next several years
the monsoon seasons changed animals
couldn't find food
and clean water this natural disaster
called the gray's landing super eruption
was
colossal that's how researchers
described it in their recent studies
it covered more than 8 900 square miles
of what's now southern idaho and
northern nevada
the streams of lava enameled an area as
large as new jersey
in scorching hot volcanic glass it
instantly sterilized the land surface
wiping out
all the plant life that had been
thriving there before
there have been at least three other
super eruptions in the history of the
yellowstone volcano
they happened 2.1 million 1.3 million
and 64 000 years ago they were six
thousand
seven hundred and twenty five hundred
times more powerful
than the devastating eruption of mount
saint helens in washington state
in 1980 the most recent super eruption
was dubbed
the lava creek eruption it formed the
yellowstone caldera
after spewing out 240 cubic miles of
rock
dust and volcanic ash
these days yellowstone national park is
a mind-boggling collection of ten
thousand mud pots
hot springs geysers and vents emitting
volcanic gasses
heat loving microorganisms live in most
of them
they paint the park in its brilliant
colors
the most famous geyser is called old
faithful
it got this name at the end of the 19th
century because of how regular its
eruptions were
this geyser is more active than others
erupting about 17
times a day each of these magnificent
events
lasts from one to five minutes and the
fountain of steaming water
can reach the height of 180 feet
scientists have spent many years trying
to figure out what's hiding
under yellowstone park they've
discovered that surface water
goes several miles down into the crust
it gets heated
and boils supplying the geysers
around seven miles below the surface
there's a reservoir
of half melted rock that's the magma
chamber
and it's more than 30 miles wide an
enormous plume of hot rock
which looks somewhat like a mushroom
feeds this chamber
it rises from the depth of 400 miles
traveling through the planet's upper
mantle a thick layer
of mostly solid rock sometimes
this plume overheats the magma chamber
the land in that place
lifts and tiny earthquakes help some
liquid escape to the surface
the pressure inside the chamber drops
and the ground
lowers again since 2004
some parts of the yellowstone caldera
which is a clever word for a volcanic
crater
have been surging upward much faster
than usual
the rate's been almost three inches per
year
no uplift has been that quick since
scientists started close
observations in the 1970s
and still experts are sure the super
volcano doesn't present any danger these
days
for an eruption to happen the magma
inside has to be at least fifty percent
molten
with yellowstone this number is just
five to fifteen percent
even if there's some volcanic activity
it's more likely to be a spurt of oozing
molten rock
known as a lava flow it does present
some danger
but it's easily avoidable or
it can be a hydrothermal explosion then
a large volume of superheated water
trapped below the surface
will rapidly turn from liquid into steam
this steam along with boiling water mud
and pieces of rock will burst through
the surface with great force
then the debris will litter the area of
up to several miles
in diameter